feat: Add Blog Post about `unroll` in the contrib distribution (#8097)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2025/contrib-unroll-processor.md

```

Here's how you can do that using the `transform` processor followed by `unroll`:

```yaml
receivers: ...

processors:
  transform:
    error_mode: ignore
    log_statements:
      - context: log
        statements:
          - set(body, Split(body, "\"},"))
  unroll: {}
exporters: ...

services:
  pipelines:
    logs:
      receivers: [...]
      processors: [transform, unroll]
      exporters: [...]
```

This transform statement uses `Split` to separate the body into chunks using the
`"},"` delimiter, producing a list-like body that the unroll processor can
expand.

## Summary

This feature started from a simple need: make the Collector more versatile and
capable of expanding log records.

> We tried the OTTL route, realized it wouldn't easily work, and upstreamed a

Reviewer: Should OTTL be improved to allow safely adding new records? If no, why not? If yes, should we link to a tracking issue?

Author: Went ahead and added a bit to the summary to be a tad bit more explicit in the conclusion 😄

---
title: Contributing the Unroll Processor to the OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib
linkTitle: Adding the Unroll Processor
date: 2025-10-14
author: >-
  [Keith Schmitt](https://github.com/schmikei) (Bindplane)
issue: 8039
sig: Collector
cSpell:ignore: Bindplane CloudWatch OTTL schmikei VPC
---

The idea for unrolling bundled logs inside the OpenTelemetry Collector didn't
start with a processor.

When the OpenTelemetry community first discussed the problem of how to handle
logs that contain multiple logical events in a single body, like a JSON array,
the initial instinct was to solve it with an
[OTTL (OpenTelemetry Transform Language) function inside the transform processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/41791).

And that made sense to me at first glance. OTTL is powerful, flexible, and can
handle transformations on the record level. But we found deeper challenges.
**The transform processor had a hard time adding new log records

> mid-iteration**. It mutates and filters existing data, but expanding one record

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The transform processor had a hard time adding new log records
mid-iteration. It mutates and filters existing data, but expanding one record
```

into many isn't something it can feasibly do within its role as a single
processor.

That's where we wanted to jump in and help. Back in January of this year I
helped develop a dedicated unroll processor in our distro of the OpenTelemetry
Collector, primarily because our customer base was running into these issues.

The unroll processor expands bundled records in a clean, deterministic way.
After running it for months in production,
[I wanted to help by upstreaming the unroll processor so the OpenTelemetry community could benefit from a shared solution](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/42491).

Let me explain what the unroll processor is, how it works, how it can help you,
and how
[we helped contribute upstream to the Contrib distribution](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/42500).

## Why unroll?

The core problem is simple. **Some sources deliver multiple events within one
log record**. You want to work with clean, individual log entries.

Before unroll, you had two awkward options:

1. Pre-process logs outside the Collector—if you even could insert the logic.

> 2. Try to bend OTTL/transform into doing something it was never designed for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before unroll, you had two options:

1. Pre-process logs outside the Collector—if you even could insert the logic.
2. Try to bend OTTL/transform into doing something it was never designed for.

Neither turned out to be the right approach to address the problem.
```

## What the unroll processor does

The unroll processor takes a **list-like log body**, like a JSON array, and
expands it into **one log record per element**, while preserving timestamps, and

> both resource and log attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The unroll processor takes a list-like log body, like a JSON array, and
expands it into one log record per element, while preserving timestamps, and
both resource and log attributes.
```

It's simple, predictable, and production-safe.

## Why decide against OTTL?

We explored this deeply.

On paper, solving this via a transform + OTTL combo seemed simpler. Once we got
into it, we ran into a core limitation: **OTTL can't safely add new records
during iteration**. Trying to generate new entries mid-loop leads to skipped
records, unreliable statement execution, and brittle behavior.

Transform and filter processors are excellent for mutation and suppression. But
**expansion** is a different responsibility. It requires its own semantics,
lifecycle, and guarantees.

The unroll processor cleanly separates the concern of adding records from
transformation logic and operates in a way that's both composable and
predictable.

I helped develop the first version of the unroll processor in the Bindplane
Distro of OpenTelemetry Collector. It was first shipped and in use by customers
in **January 2025 and has been running in production ever since**.

I've seen customers use it across:

- VPC logs
- CloudWatch ingestion pipelines
- Windows + endpoint logs
- Bundled collector telemetry

We observed **very low issue volume** even under real production load, which

> gave us the confidence to **propose it upstream**. Specifically when the initial

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gave us the confidence to propose it upstream. Specifically when the initial
```

```

Here's how you can do that using the `transform` processor followed by `unroll`:

```yaml
transform:
  error_mode: ignore
  log_statements:
    - context: log
      statements:
        - set(body, Split(body, "\"},"))
unroll: {}
```

This transform statement uses `Split` to separate the body into chunks using the
`"},"` delimiter, producing a list-like body that the unroll processor can
expand.

```yaml
receivers: ...

processors:
  transform:
    error_mode: ignore
    log_statements:
      - context: log
        statements:
          - set(body, Split(body, "\"},")) where true
  unroll: {}
exporters: ...

services:
  pipelines:
    logs:
      receivers: [...]
      processors: [transform, unroll]
      exporters: [...]
```

> ## What's Next?

Author: Ah good point, will rename it 👍 let me know if you want me to add a What's next section as I recalled while writing this that it was a pattern from somewhere I can't find anymore. Thanks for the suggestion!

This feature started from a simple need: **make the Collector more versatile and

> capable of expanding log records.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature started from a simple need: make the Collector more versatile and
capable of expanding log records.
```

---
title: Contributing the Unroll Processor to the OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib
linkTitle: Adding the Unroll Processor
date: 2025-10-14
author: >-
  [Keith Schmitt](https://github.com/schmikei) (Bindplane)
issue: 8039
sig: Collector
cSpell:ignore: Bindplane CloudWatch OTTL schmikei VPC
---

The idea for unrolling bundled logs inside the OpenTelemetry Collector didn't
start with a processor.

By "unrolling," I mean taking a single log record that contains multiple logical
events—for instance, a JSON array with ten log entries—and expanding it into ten
separate log records, one for each event. This lets you work with individual log
entries rather than bundled payloads.

> When the Collector Sig first discussed the problem of how to handle logs that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the Collector SIG first discussed the problem of how to handle logs that
```

mutates and filters existing data, but expanding one record into many isn't
something it can feasibly do within its role as a single processor.

That's where we wanted to jump in and help. Back in January of this year I
helped develop a dedicated unroll processor in our distro of the OpenTelemetry
Collector, primarily because our customer base was running into these issues.

The unroll processor expands bundled records in a clean, deterministic way.
After running it for months in production,
[I wanted to help by upstreaming the unroll processor so the OpenTelemetry community could benefit from a shared solution](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/42491).

Let me explain what the unroll processor is, how it works, how it can help you,
and how
[we helped contribute upstream to the Contrib distribution](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/42500).

## Why unroll?

The core problem is simple: some sources deliver multiple events within one log
record. You want to work with clean, individual log entries.

Before unroll, you had two options:

> 1. Pre-process logs outside the Collector—if you even could insert the logic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Pre-process logs outside the Collector—if you could insert the logic.
```

**expansion** is a different responsibility. It requires its own semantics,
lifecycle, and guarantees.

The unroll processor cleanly separates the concern of adding records from
transformation logic and operates in a way that's both composable and
predictable.

I helped develop the first version of the unroll processor in the Bindplane
Distro of OpenTelemetry Collector. It was first shipped and in use by customers
in January 2025 and has been running in production ever since.

I've seen customers use it across:

- VPC logs
- CloudWatch ingestion pipelines
- Windows + endpoint logs
- Bundled collector telemetry

We observed very low issue volume even under real production load, which gave us
the confidence to propose it upstream. Specifically when the initial receiver or
source of the log signals is fairly format agnostic.

## How to configure the unroll processor

Drop the unroll processor into your pipeline wherever you need to expand bundled
log payloads. Here's a minimal configuration example to get you started:

```yaml
processors:
  unroll:
service:
  pipelines:
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [..., unroll, ...]
      exporters: [logging]
```

> ## Common unroll patterns

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Common unroll pattern
```

The unroll processor only performs work if `log.body` is an iterable list—for
example, a proper JSON array. But in real-world pipelines, log records aren't
always so neatly structured. Sometimes, additional preprocessing is needed to
convert raw log payloads into a format that the unroll processor can operate on.

> ### Example: multiple JSON objects in a single log record

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Example: Multiple JSON objects in a single log record
```

Consider a case where multiple JSON objects are concatenated into a single log
record, like this:

```json
{"@timestamp":"2025-09-19T02:20:17.920Z", "log.level": "INFO", "message":"initialized", "ecs.version": "1.2.0","service.name":"ES_ECS","event.dataset":"elasticsearch.server","process.thread.name":"main","log.logger":"org.elasticsearch.node.Node","elasticsearch.node.name":"es-test-3","elasticsearch.cluster.name":"elasticsearch"},{"type": "server", "timestamp": "2025-09-18T20:44:01,838-04:00", "level": "INFO", "component": "o.e.n.Node", "cluster.name": "elasticsearch", "node.name": "es-test", "message": "initialized" }
```

> Here's how you can do that using the `transform` processor followed by `unroll`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here's how you can preprocess using the `transform` processor followed by `unroll`:
```

And that made sense to me at first glance. OTTL is powerful, flexible, and can
handle transformations on the record level. But we found deeper challenges.
**The transform processor had a hard time adding new log records
mid-iteration**. It mutates and filters existing data, but expanding one record
into many isn't something it can feasibly do within its role as a single
processor.

That's where we wanted to jump in and help. Back in January of this year I
helped develop a dedicated unroll processor in our distro of the OpenTelemetry
Collector, primarily because our customer base was running into these issues.

The unroll processor expands bundled records in a clean, deterministic way.
After running it for months in production,
[I wanted to help by upstreaming the unroll processor so the OpenTelemetry community could benefit from a shared solution](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/42491).

Let me explain what the unroll processor is, how it works, how it can help you,
and how
[we helped contribute upstream to the Contrib distribution](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/42500).

> ## Why Unroll?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why unroll?
```

The core problem is simple. **Some sources deliver multiple events within one
log record**. You want to work with clean, individual log entries.

> - You can't control how the source emits data.

Reviewer 2: should this be a quote? We should not have a bullet list with one item

Before unroll, you had two awkward options:

1. Pre-process logs outside the Collector—if you even could insert the logic.
2. Try to bend OTTL/transform into doing something it was never designed for.

> ## What the Unroll Processor Does

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What the unroll processor does
```

into it, we ran into a core limitation: **OTTL can't safely add new records
during iteration**. Trying to generate new entries mid-loop leads to skipped
records, unreliable statement execution, and brittle behavior.

Transform and filter processors are excellent for mutation and suppression. But
**expansion** is a different responsibility. It requires its own semantics,
lifecycle, and guarantees.

The unroll processor cleanly separates the concern of adding records from
transformation logic and operates in a way that's both composable and
predictable.

I helped develop the first version of the unroll processor in the Bindplane
Distro of OpenTelemetry Collector. It was first shipped and in use by customers
in **January 2025 and has been running in production ever since**.

I've seen customers use it across:

- VPC logs
- CloudWatch ingestion pipelines
- Windows + endpoint logs
- Bundled collector telemetry

We observed **very low issue volume** even under real production load, which
gave us the confidence to **propose it upstream**. Specifically when the initial
receiver or source of the log signals is fairly format agnostic.

> ## How to Configure the Unroll Processor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How to configure the unroll processor
```
